---
layout: post
title: "I Guess I'm A Metalhead Now?"
date: 2019-08-27 20:30:00
tags: [media, music, king gizzard, itrn]
comments: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image:
  feature: https://f4.bcbits.com/img/a0402916090_16.jpg
  credit: Flightless Records
---

At the risk of sounding like a base-model white guy in his early 20s, one of my favorite musical groups right now is _King Gizzard and the Lizard Wizard_. A couple of weeks ago I bought tickets to go see them in Philly and something that I seriously felt like I had to take into account was, "in light of their upcoming thrash metal album, am I going to be sucked into the ensuing mosh pit, and die?". My favorite _King Gizz_ albums have always been their more chilled-out stuff like _Sketches_ and _Paper Maché_, so I was apprehensive about how much I'd enjoy _Infest The Rats' Nest_ and whether or not that would affect my enjoyment of the concert that Ticketmaster was going to charge me a bunch of BS fees to see. Well never fret folks 'cause this one absolutely slaps.

<!--more-->

As with a lot of _King Gizzard's_ albums, [_Infest The Rats' Nest_](https://open.spotify.com/album/2Jyq77zjK3pAECGEm6SQVc) is greater than the sum of its parts. My reaction to the singles they put out was just sort of, "neat". I liked "Planet B" but was iffy on a whole album of that. But I ended up, really, really liking _IRTN_.

First off, it has a plot. It's some really cool dystopian sci-fi taking place post-environmental collapse. It starts off with some scene-setting vignettes - the environment is just gone, the people who can afford it have abandoned Earth for colonies on Mars, a presumed breakdown of law, order, and the economy have led to a black market for human organs, and people are being wiped out by antibiotic-resistant disease. In the album's second half, those desperate to escape earth try to colonize Venus and die repeatedly in the attempt. And then they end up in hell (or maybe it's figurative? or hallucination?) and the album just sort of ends. Unlike some other _Gizz_ albums that are so concept-heavy it's weird to listen to any of it in isolation (_MOTU_ is the worst offender), each track on _ITRN_ can really stand on its own while also being enhanced when listened to in the context of the full album. And, while there are probably fewer lyrics in the whole album than words in this paragraph, the music itself tells a lot of the story by setting this mood of bleak, angry panic. Listening to this gave me big epic sci-fi energy the weekend it came out.

I also have to mention the environmentalist message. You can find this at least once on most of _Gizz's_ albums but they've really been amping it up this year. Where their last album, _Fishing For Fishies_, was all "guys we have to stop polluting," _Infest The Rats' Nest_ says "the Earth is completely, supremely boned." This album gets angry about the future in a way that I think reflects a lot of the environmental angst that millennials-and-younger have and I hope the album gets more popular for that alone.

There's also an essential "gizziness"\(?\) to _ITRN_; while it's a lot harder than a lot of _King Gizzard's_ other stuff it still sounds like a _King Gizzard_ album. Something I really like about these guys is that, although they dabble in a lot of different genres, their personnel and instrumentation don't vary that wildly and there are common musical structures they employ across their work. I'm not entirely sure how to quantify it, but there's this _King Gizzard_-y sound that you start to notice after listening to enough of their stuff. Part of it is you can hear how much fun they have. There's a lot of legitimate artistry but you can also tell that the band doesn't take themselves too seriously. Not that the subject matter here isn't serious, but there's like a degree of camp, almost. This core style is maintained on _ITRN_ and that made it more accessible for me than if I'd just picked up listening to a new metal band - although maybe that's just me saying "I was ready to enjoy this thing because I was already a fan of the creators" which, like, duh.

This is all to say that _Infest The Rats' Nest_ has become my go-to exercising soundtrack. It really makes you want to just sprint super hard. I think I listened to the album more times through on the day of its release than I've listened to _Fishies_, _ever_. Highlights for me are "Mars For The Rich" and "Perihelion", while I'm going to go against the grain of (what I perceive to be) the fan-consensus and say I don't like "Superbug" that much. It's much longer than anything else on the album and to be blunt I think some of the lyrics are just bad. They use "fuck" a lot and really want to rhyme things with "fuck" like it's going to make this sludge metal song _about pestilence_ any harder. When it gets to

> superbug is like a truck / penicillin is a duck

it just loses me completely.

#### rating: 4/5 anthony fantanos
