---
layout: backlog
title: "Matt's Video Game Backlog #7: Bioshock"
date: 2020-09-20 14:00:00
categories: [backlog]
tags: [media, video game, bioshock]
comments: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image:
  feature: vgbacklog/bioshock.jpg
---

The entire time I was playing _Bioshock_ I could not stop comparing it to Bethesda's _Fallout_ games. The faux-1950s aesthetic shared by both games is too similar to ignore. Both have you exploring crumbling art-deco settings while oldies music plays from radios as you shoot drug addicts, etc. Both games also have a ton of ambient storytelling and characters who speak to you via ~~holotape~~ audio diary. I wonder how much of a chicken/egg thing it is. Was _Bioshock_ popular enough that Bethesda took cues from it when adapting the isometric _Fallouts_ to 3D? Or was _Bioshock_ paying homage to the older _Fallouts_ (at that point, there hadn't been one in almost a decade)? I tried Googling around for an answer (for like 5 seconds) and couldn't find anything specific, but I _did_ find a ton of 2007-8 forum threads arguing about which game copied which and which was better and yadda yadda ya. For what it's worth, I think the aesthetic works better in _Bioshock_ than in _Fallout 3_. In the latter, the retro-futurism seems to be just for the goof of it a lot of the time, and there's a lot of incongruity regarding like, why are people still like this 200 years after the apocalypse? I could go on, but so many people have talked about the _Fallout_ games and this isn't a _Fallout_ post. _Bioshock_, meanwhile, actualy takes place in 1960, so it's got that going for it in terms of making sense. At the same time, a lot could probably be said on the topic of how much sense Rapture makes as a place, and the politics of Andrew Ryan or whatever. Again, I'm not going to get in to it, but these games are really ripe for comparison, and there a ton of things that I think _Bioshock_ does better. It certainly runs way better on my laptop than any _Fallout_ game ever has, that's for sure.

The biggest difference between _Bioshock_ and _Fallout 3_ is that _Bioshock_'s focus is 100% its combat. The gunplay is super polished and feels really nice, and I can tell there's a lot of depth to it in terms of how you use your arsenal of weapons/ammo/magic/the environment. But while I can tell it's well done, I just don't enjoy it that much. When games have this much combat I tend to prefer to go hard into the game's other systems to either trivialize the combat or avoid it entirely. _Bioshock_ doesn't really have any other systems though. It was hard for me to push myself to invest the amount of time that I wanted to in order to form a good opinion of it.
