---
layout: backlog
title: "Matt's Video Game Backlog #12: Night in the Woods (2017)"
date: 2021-01-15 18:00:00
tags: [media, video game, night in the woods]
comments: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image:
  feature: vgbacklog/nightinthewoods.jpg
---

This game was pretty good. I really struggled with the first half or so of it, I think because I had trouble relating to Mae and didn't enjoy acting out her naive and erratic behavior through the gameplay. I guess I got annoyed because what I _wanted_ to be doing was learning more about Mae and why she dropped out of college, but she refused to talk about it to anybody. I _wanted_ to figure out what sort of supernatural stuff was going on in her dreams, but _she_ wanted to like, shoplift. It grated on me for some reason, which feels kind of silly to admit because it's not like I went in to _Night in the Woods_ expecting some sort of RPG experience where my decisions affected the outcome. I warmed up to it, though, after Mae's friends started to call her out on her shit and she opened up to them and matured a bit, which was all very well written. The writing is all excellent, with a setting and characters that all feel very three-dimensional and familiar. _Night in the Woods_ is very about the vibes and it conveys those vibes very effectively. I didn't drop out of college like Mae, but I definitely related to the like, ennui, of returning to your hometown after being away for a while, and you see your old friends and find that things have changed in your absence. In addition to being "good" the writing is also _hilarious_ (see feature image). On the other hand, I didn't enjoy the gameplay very much. _Night in the Woods_ is basically a jacked up visual novel with some mediocre platforming and microgame bits, and I didn't find it that engaging. Maybe games that are _this_ story heavy just aren't my thing. If the visual and audio parts of the game didn't contribute so much to the experience I might have preferred this as a book, honestly. At any rate, it was an overall good experience and I'm glad I stuck with it.
