---
layout: post
title: "Pokemon SWSH Is Better Than You Think (And Here's Why)"
date: 2020-11-1 12:00:00
categories: [post]
tags: [media]
comments: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

# TODO:

- Not sure I care enough anymore to finish writing this. Maybe I'll come back to it next time I get Pokemon Energy, but last time I just went on to play.... better pokemon games

Pokemon Sword and Shield are, in a vacuum, not very good games. This doesn't mean they aren't fun, and I think they're worth the price if you can find them on sale. There was a lot of backlash when they came out in 2019 for a lot of reasons, mostly due to the decision to not include all Pokemon in the code of the game. For the record I think this was a terrible decision, and it killed a lot of my desire to keep playing these games after the story was over. But as a self-contained, singleplayer experience, I thought SWSH did a good job, and principally made some interesting decisions plot-wise that I really liked. These changes were met with backlash as well, but I think the anger there was misplaced, so I'm going to try and explain my reasoning and hopefully improve your opinion of this aspect of the games.

<!--more-->

# The Story Isn't About You

- YOU are the rival, the plot is about Hop
- Hop idolizes his older brother and wants to be the guy to one-up him someday, but you constantly get in the way
- Hop has to figure out how to deal with this threat to his self-image, and they show you his internal journey through _gameplay_
- The bit with the legendary at the end isn't the actual climax of the story, it's a plot device to facilitate you and Hop coming together
- "Epilogue" is the real final act, with Hop coming to terms with who he is, and being confident and having self-worth despite you outdoing him

# The World Makes Sense

- this might be the first game to ask what a setting with pokemon in it would actually be like, how people would actually monetize this
- having a yearly youth sports competition makes WAY MORE SENSE than the "gym challenge", which has always been about gameplay first and making sense in the world second
- the whole thing is basically a sports movie
- the team yell decision is brillant, because "evil teams" are a nothing concept that doesn't make sense irl - team rocket is a GANG, magma/aqua are ecoterrorists, plasma is... a cult? I think with yell and previously team skull they realized that an "evil team" is not something that exists in real life as a concept

# Pokemon Conventions Are Ridiculous

- "pokemon conventions" frequently get in the way of the story theyre trying to tell
- the need to have a legendary pokemon part complicates what is otherwise a very "low-magic" sports drama
- people didnt like that team yell was just some sports hooligans because they aren't threatening and kind of silly, but why do we NEED some nefarious cabal? why does every plot have to have the literal exact same framework involving an A-plot of beating the pokemon league and a B-plot of terrorists awaken an ancient evil

# Conclusion

- at the end of the day though, these games are really 3-steps-forward-2-steps-back in all aspects
- theyre "getting there", but you cant just almost get there every time. then its just bad
