---
layout: post
title: "Unncecessary Cynicism Toward's Dolly Parton's Christmas Movie"
date: 2020-12-12 12:00:00
categories: [post]
tags: [media]
comments: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image:
  feature: shipwreck.jpg
  credit: "Ludolf Bakhuizen / Public domain"
---

# TODO:

1. Actually read A Christmas Carol so I can draw actual conclusions
2. Look up what owning a town actually means and the history behind the phenomenon
3. Post around christmas time

Let me get one thing out of the way: absolutely no one was tuning in to _Christmas on the Square_ expecting thought provoking socio-economic commentary. You watch this movie for the over-the-top musical numbers and the child-bartender and Dolly Parton wearing an increasing amount of rhinestones in each scene. And boy does it deliver on those fronts. That being said, I think the way this movie adapts the classic "A Christmas Carol" story is a bit... odd. If you haven't seen this movie yet, which I definitely recommend you do, it features Christine Baranski as ~Scrooge~ Regina, a cold-hearted capitalist, who is visited on Christmas Eve by ~Christmas Ghosts~ an angel, played by Dolly Parton, who helps her see the error of her ways and reconnect with the community in which she grew up. It's basically _A Christmas Carol_, is the point I'm trying to make. As with everything in this movie, the Christmas Carol plot beats are cranked up to 11, and this includes the cruelty of the villain and the righteous fervor of the heroes. In this one area, I think, the cranking up of things acted to the detriment of its plot, in a way that I'll explain... now.

(I'm going to spoil everything so, don't read this post if you care about that.)

<!--more-->

The central conflict of this movie is as follows: Regina's father, who owned _all of the town's land_, has recently died, and the property has passed to her. Regina, who fled town in her youth due to the shame of a teen pregnancy, does care about the town and does not want to have the responsibility of landlording on her shoulders, and so sells the _entire town_ to a development company that plans to build a mall ("Cheetah Mall", lmao) in it's place. To this end, the film opens with Regina handing out eviction notices to literally everyone in town, including some dogs. Everyone has to move by the end of the month.

This is the first place I think the movie goes a bit too far. If you look at the character of Scrooge, who Regina is clearly filling the shoes of, his crimes as portrayed in _A Christmas Carol_ lack the same... cruelty? In the opening bit of _A Christmas Carol_ Scrooge is portrayed as a person of extreme greed and indifference, a Malthusian who would rather fund prisons and workhouses than donate to the poor, because it is cheaper for him. Would Scrooge do what Regina does if put in the same position and given the chance? Definitely. But we don't actually see him do this in the book, in the book he's just a giant stick in the mud who refuses to celebrate Christmas with his own family and who doesn't want to donate money to help the poor or to give his employees holiday PTO. He's a dick, but doesn't _evict his entire hometown on a whim_. You could probably argue that with Scrooge's political donations he's made society as a whole worse than Regina does, but there's something that I find horrifying about the flippant way Regina delivers eviction notices to her childhood friends, as if the compensation they are receiving for their properties makes it all somehow ok.

This movie goes really hard on the whole "the solution to a _bad_ landlord is a _good_ landlord!" angle, and really I didn't expect anything else from Netflix and Dolly Parton, but it's sort of wild how the movie expects you to see Regina's position as a good and normal thing. She's brought back to the light side by memories of her dad, the Good Landlord (tm) who "kept rents low and spirits high!" and was beloved by the townsfolk for his good... property management skills? His "governance" seemed to be largely in the form of building new buildings and selecting "good" businesses for the town, which means, what, refusing to rent to people who aren't up to the town's standard? Whatever that is? We see, in a flashback, Regina's dad telling her that someday she'll be in charge and must lead the town with a compassionate hand, and it's like, wait what? What is this feudal bullshit? Regina's best friend from childhood repeatedly references her time as the town's first female mayor and it's like, you guys have a mayor? What for, it looks like you already have a literal baron! What's the point of having an elected leader when there's a single unelected individual who can just make your entire town disappear at a whim? And where is the current mayor? Are they helping? That said, what could a mayor possibly do to prevent Regina from kicking everyone out, if they're also a tenant? It's an insane situation and no one in town should be ok with it, regardless of how nice of a person Regina is.

The townsfolk of this town are very pissed, to their credit. Organized by the local pastor (whose name is Christian, lmao), they form a resistance movement to oppose the mass-eviction. At their meeting there's an entire musical number about how much they hate Regina's guts and want to literally beat her ass. Christian appeals to their better nature and calms them down, but I was kind of sitting their like... but you could beat her up though? Like, literally beating her up isn't necessary, but you _could_ all go to her house and detain her so she can't sign the legal papers to sign your town and force you all to move. There's literally only her and her assistant in the palatial manor she lives in. What's she gonna do, call the cops, who she's also evicting? There are tons of cases from this year of people blocking courthouse doors to prevent eviction hearings from taking place, or physically stopping sheriffs from evicting tenants who cannot pay rent due to COVID-related job loss. The situation portrayed in the movie isn't dissimilar and those tactics would have worked. Even short of that, I'm pretty sure landlords can't just cancel your lease agreement midway through, _they_ also signed a contract. Unless the tenant protections in the state this story takes place in are absolute dogshit, I'm pretty sure you can't just evict people on this short of a notice in the middle of a lease. The town could take Regina to court and probably win. But, the townsfolk don't do any of that, and in fact do absolutely nothing, except... I guess, pray about it? Luckily for them, it works, and God does send an angel to change Regina's mind. But what kind of message does that send? Oh, you're getting unjustly evicted, just hope you can appeal to your landlord's better nature so they _won't_ evict you? Honestly that's kind of an awful message to send this year especially, in light of the, you know, ongoing COVID-19-related eviction crisis.

This reaction of the townsfolk is where the plot of this movie really loses me. I think they should have gone campier and played up the cartoonish harshness of Regina's behavior. By focussing on the townsfolk "resisting" at all, it forces the movie to take a stance on dealing with bad landlords that it isn't prepared to take. If they _did_ follow through and make the townsfolk actually resist in any meaningful way it would have detracted from the main thrust of the movie, which is about the redemption of Regina's soul through Jesus or whatever, in addition to being a lot more anti-capitalist than Dolly Parton was probably willing to be. So it turns into this weird neoliberal idea of what a "good protest movement" should be, which I guess is putting up signs and marching around and bothering no one and then just moving to a new town because you did get evicted. Furthermore, the fact that the townsfolk don't do anything substantial means that it doesn't add a ton to the movie plot-wise, so why even go there? It still only serves to detract from Regina's journey, which is the movie's entire point.

In conclusion, I have one simple change that I think would have fixed _Christmas on the Square_ for me: at the end, when Regina decides not to evict everyone, have her _give them ownership of their homes and businesses instead_. I can't believe, that after this whole movie, the big joyous change of heart is just Regina deciding not to do the shitty thing she was about to do. Again, she doesn't do a positive thing, she is just convinced not to do a negative thing. She decides to continue being the town's literal baroness but now she promises to become a true member of the community, so everyone's ecstatic about it. But what better way to apologise for the situation she caused than to empower the rest of the town and relinquish the power that she has over everyone else? That would _truly_ make her an equal member of the community. And, what could be Christmassier than giving every a _gift_, _for Christmas_. One of the movie's most crucial numbers states that "Christmas is a time for givin'" - I think this movie would have worked a lot better if that idea was actually reflected by the plot.
